docs(security): Improve authentication docs (#27692)
prestodb/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/security/password-file.rst

============================

Presto can be configured to enable frontend password authentication over
HTTPS for clients, such as the :ref:`cli`, or the JDBC and ODBC drivers. The
username and password are validated against usernames and passwords stored
in a file. Once password-file based authentication is set up, no user is able
to connect to the Presto coordinator without authenticating themselves.

To enable password file based authentication for Presto, configuration changes are made on
the Presto coordinator. No changes are required to the worker configuration;
only the communication from the clients to the coordinator is authenticated.

> However, if you want to secure the communication between

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To secure the communication between
```

> Presto nodes with SSL/TLS configure :doc:`/security/internal-communication`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Presto nodes with SSL/TLS, see :doc:`/security/internal-communication`.
```

Presto Server Configuration
---------------------------

TLS Configuration on Presto Coordinator
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When using password-file based authentication, access to the Presto coordinator
should be through HTTPS. With HTTPS protocol, Presto coordinator needs to present its
certificate to the client for successfully completing SSL handshake. You can do it by
creating a :ref:`server_java_keystore` on the coordinator.

Presto Coordinator Node Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You must make the following changes to the environment prior to configuring the
Presto coordinator to use password-file based authentication and HTTPS.

* :ref:`server_java_keystore`

You also need to make changes to the Presto configuration files.
Password-file based authentication is configured on the coordinator in two parts.
The first part is to enable HTTPS support and password authentication
in the coordinator's ``config.properties`` file. The second part is
to configure password file as the password authenticator.

Server Config Properties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The following is an example of the required properties that need to be added

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is an example of the properties that must be added
```

    htpasswd -B -C 10 password.db test

.. _cli:

Presto CLI
----------

> Please check :doc:`/clients/presto-cli` for instructions to set up Presto CLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See :doc:`/clients/presto-cli` for instructions to set up Presto CLI.
```

Environment Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

TLS Configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Access to the Presto coordinator should be through HTTPS when using

> password-file based authentication. CLI must verify the certificate presented by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
password-file based authentication. The Presto CLI must verify the certificate presented by the
```

coordinator using its truststore to complete SSL handshake. You can either use the
default truststore which comes with your Java installation on the client machine, or

> you can define a custom truststore. Please see :ref:`cli_java_truststore` for instructions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can define a custom truststore. See :ref:`cli_java_truststore` for instructions
```

> to import the server's certificate into CLI's truststore. We do not recommend using self-signed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to import the server's certificate into the CLI's truststore. We do not recommend using self-signed
```

certificates in production.

Presto CLI Execution
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In addition to the options that are required when connecting to a Presto
coordinator that does not require authentication, invoking the CLI
for secure Presto cluster requires a number of additional command line

> options. You need to include ``--truststore-*`` properties to secure the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
options. You must include ``--truststore-*`` properties to secure the
```

                                the url when using password file based authentication.
``--truststore-path``           The location of the Java Truststore file on the client machine that will be used
                                to secure TLS.
``--truststore-password``       The password for the truststore. This must match the
                                password you specified when creating the truststore.
``--user``                      The username of the user trying to connect to the server.
``--password``                  Prompts for a password for the ``user``.
=============================== =========================================================================

.. note::

    Run ``./presto --help`` for getting the list of available command line options with their descriptions.

Troubleshooting
---------------

Java Keystore File Verification
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Verify the password for a keystore file and view its contents using
:ref:`troubleshooting_keystore`.

SSL Debugging for Presto CLI
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Debug SSL related errors when running Presto CLI using :ref:`ssl_debugging_for_cli`.

Common Errors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Please go through `Password Authentication Setup on Local <https://prestodb.io/blog/2026/04/30/password-authentication-setup-on-local/>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See `Password Authentication Setup on Local <https://prestodb.io/blog/2026/04/30/password-authentication-setup-on-local/>`_
```
This is okay as a short-term answer, but relying on blogs in technical documentation should be avoided. I'd like to review the errors from the blog, and include appropriate ones into the [Troubleshooting](https://prestodb.io/docs/current/troubleshoot.html) section of the Presto doc.

Author: Ok, let me take care of this.

to see common errors and their fixes when setting up password file based authentication for Presto.

Common SSL Errors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Please see `SSL Handshake Failures <https://www.baeldung.com/java-ssl-handshake-failures>`_ for detailed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See `SSL Handshake Failures <https://www.baeldung.com/java-ssl-handshake-failures>`_ for detailed
```
